image: king-kong.jpg
image_alt: King Kong

Some [recent
mumblings](http://www.coindesk.com/can-bitcoins-price-ever-stable/) on
CoinDesk on the idea of a cryptocurrency whose value is stabilized with a
built-in prescription that manages its supply provoked me to write this
article on why this is a vain dream. There is a common fallacy which says that
price stability is required in order for a currency to function as a form of
money. The way people use terms like _store of value_ and _unit of account_
presumes stability. However, I will show that in an unstable world, a stable
currency is counterproductive and furthermore that an unstable currency serves
the traditional purposes of money, to the extent that they can be meaningfully
defined in unstable conditions.

First of all, it is impossible, long-term, to expect an algorithm to maintain
the stability of a currency. There will always be money to be made by
predicting the algorithm’s future effect on supply, and once people have
learned to do so then the algorithm necessarily ceases to achieve its desired
results. For someone who gains by anticipating such an algorithm is not
producing something valuable that other people want to buy, so he must be
gaining off of other investors, who are losing. That means other people
holding the currency, which means that the currency cannot possibly be
stable—either it is dropping in price, or the supply is rapidly declining.
(The outcome would depend on the details of the prescription.) This can
continue until the market cap of the currency goes to zero. In order to
succeed at manipulating the price to keep it stable, the prescription must
never allow traders to adapt to it. It must continually be smarter than
everyone else. This is not something anyone can reliably guarantee, especially
a Bitcoin startup (if history is any guide). This is the same reason that
attempts to create crypto-equities that track the price of gold or dollars and
other things through protocols like ProtoShares and
[Mastercoin](/mempool/mastercoin-is-a-nightmare-of-insanity/) won’t work. It
is also why the federal reserve is traditionally so secretive, why the
chairman tries to talk without saying anything, and why his or her every move
is so deeply scrutinized.

Stability is about as real as the fountain of youth, love potions, or
perpetual motion machines. It is not to be found anywhere in the universe but
for some reason people act as if such a thing could somehow exist. Prices
reflect the availabilities of things that we _actually can_ have, so maybe we
should all stop searching for chimera of stability and accept that if the
world is unstable, than prices ought to be unstable too. Otherwise prices
could not serve the function of enabling people to coordinate the allocation
of scarce resources.

Right now the world is deciding whether it wants Bitcoin to be its money.
That’s kind of a big change, and it’s pretty reasonable that Bitcoin would [be
volatile](/mempool/i-love-bitcoins-volatility/).  Will Bitcoin take over or
will it drop to nothing? Fundamentally we don’t know and the rapid changes in
Bitcoin’s price reflect the confusion and self-doubt in the minds of real
people trading it, and this is exactly what they should be doing because
without price signals, there could be no Bitcoin adoption.  Bitcoin’s
exponential growth is a [very strong
signal](/mempool/bitcoins-compound-rewards/), and if Bitcoin were stable,
there would be no such signal. There would be no dedicated community of
enthusiasts because no one would have any particular reason to want it to be
adopted other than the company issuing it. And that company could not offer
any value with its stable currency because it cannot unilaterally create
liquidity, which is the fundamental thing that makes a currency useful.

What actually makes for a good store of value? The problem with this term is
that it is a terrible metaphor. When we store a physical object, typically we
shut it away from other people in another object, like a box or something. But
what if I had a box that, like Tinkerbell’s magic, only existed if other
people believed in it? That’s what a store of value is like. Value is not a
physically real thing, like the box. It is an expectation about how much
people want something. The whole idea of storing value is absurd. It’s like
some kind of dream logic. The only way that a good can “store value” is if
everyone wants it so badly that it will be snapped up even at a tiny discount.

This does not mean that _anything_ can be a good store of value. Everyone
could treat, say, plastic poker chips as a good store of value and they would
only behave like one until people realized that they were easy to manufacture.
But suppose there were another metal which had similar properties to gold: it
was durable, rare and difficult to extract, and distinctive enough to be
difficult to counterfeit. However, the state of our science was such that it
was only just being identified by chemists. This new metal would certainly not
have a stable value initially upon its discovery because it would take time
for the world to learn about it, but it would be perfectly rational for the
chemists who did understand it to buy up as much as they could until the rest
of the world had got wind of it. Once this metal’s properties were understood
by the whole population, then it really could “store value” because everyone
else would be using it for the same purpose.

Stability occurs (to the extent that it can happen at all) once everyone has
not only learned of the favorable properties of the good but has learned that
everyone else also knows of those properties. If I know that Bitcoin is both
scarce and unforgeable, I may still be scared to put my money in it because I
may fear that other people won’t treat it like a store of value. Furthermore,
everyone could think this way at the same time, and the market therefore still
behave fearfully. This is why people must be convinced that everyone else
believes in Bitcoin too. People today are both coming to terms with Bitcoin’s
properties and are confused about how much the rest of the market believes in
them. Hence there is fear and volatility. Nonetheless, Bitcoin cannot be
counterfeited and its supply is not likely to change, no matter what else
happens in the future. This is the best that can be done, as far as
engineering goes, to design something to be a store of value. The rest is up
to everyone else, not the engineer. Thus, if Bitcoin is going to succeed, then
it’s a good store of value.

Now, what about Bitcoin as a [unit of
account](/mempool/bitcoin-is-the-best-unit-of-account/)?  Unlike _store of
value_, this is actually a really good term, but unfortunately people do not
take it literally. When people say _unit of account_, they seem to want
something that will reliably measure wealth somehow, or that things can be
priced in without having to be constantly updated. But these are just other
ways of chasing the siren song of stability.  Here too, if the world is
changing then prices should be changing, and one can only imperfectly compare
one’s wealth at different times. Really, one can only compare different
alternatives which would have taken place over the _same_ time.

Yet there _is_ a worthwhile definition of ‘unit of account’ under these
circumstances. It is very simple: a unit of account is something such that to
gain it is considered to be profit and to lose it is considered to be loss.
Anything can serve this function, but the reason we would especially want to
use liquid goods as a unit of account is that when we are liquid we don’t have
to think too far into the future. Thus, acquiring a liquid good serves as a
reasonable end point to any venture. When you’re sitting on a huge pile of
cash, you know that you’ll be fine for some time no matter what happens.
Whereas if we were on a barter system with no highly liquid goods around, then
one would have to think much further ahead in order to assess the success of a
venture. Thus, thinking of profits and losses in terms gaining or losing a
liquid good is essential to being able to divide the entire future into
manageable tasks—as long as one is gaining that liquid good, one is doing
things correctly. Of course, when things are changing so much that the money
good itself might shift, then one has to pick which medium of account to use.
So once again, Bitcoin is a great unit of account—if it’s going to win. In
that case everyone should be trying to get as much as possible of it right
now, with the expectation of it being very liquid in the future.

Finally, what about Bitcoin as a medium of exchange? I don’t think this
function of Bitcoin is controversial. Of _course_ Bitcoin is a good medium of
exchange. My problem with this function of money is the way people treat it in
relation to the others. People sometimes think that medium of exchange should
be the _primary_ function of money, as opposed to using it as a store of
value. For example, this is an assumption behind Tim Swanson’s [concern
trolling](http://www.ofnumbers.com/2014/11/22/approximately-70-of-all-bitcoins-have-not-moved-in-6-or-more-months/)
about Bitcoin hoarding. However, it is impossible for a good to function as a
medium of exchange unless there is already demand for it as a store of value.
If I’m going to give someone bitcoins in exchange for something, there has to
be someone, somewhere, who _wants_ bitcoins. And he has to want to store them,
even if for only a short time because of everyone tried to spend their
bitcoins immediately, that would drive the price down to zero. Furthermore,
the more that people want to store bitcoins, and the higher goes its value,
the more liquid bitcoins consequently become and the more trade they enable.

Thus, Bitcoin is the kind of money that works in an unstable world, which is
the only kind that we know of, and it is a good store of value, unit of
account, and medium of exchange, to the extent that these terms make sense
amid great uncertainty. When people say “Bitcoin isn’t a good store of value
or unit of account” what they really mean is “Bitcoin isn’t being adopted
yet”, which is not a valid complaint. Bitcoin has the right properties for the
world’s money, and the more the world comes to terms with this, the more
stable it will become.
