---
title: Introduction
---

## 1. Money Production and Justice

The production of goods and services is not a purely technological matter. It always relies on a legal and moral framework, and feeds back on this framework. A firm or an industry can pursue its activities in a way that confirms and nourishes the basic legal and moral presuppositions of human cooperation; yet it can also, intentionally or unintentionally, contradict and destroy these foundations.

Ethical problems of production have been assessed in a great number of industries, ranging from agriculture to textile manufacturing in developing countries to pharmaceuticals. Today only a few important industries have escaped such scrutiny. The most important of these is the production of money. Money is omnipresent in modern life, yet the production of money does not seem to warrant any moral assessment.

To be sure, central bank representatives are lecturing the public on the importance of business ethics; but their concerns do not seem to apply to themselves.[^1] Similarly, the subject of business ethics is in a boom phase on campuses; but it is applied mainly to industrial corporations. And the churches and other religious institutions pronounce on many matters of politics; but monetary phenomena, such as paper money, central banks, dollarization, currency boards, and so on, are hardly mentioned at all. For example, Catholic social teaching only vaguely says that economic activity presupposes a “stable currency”[^2] and that the “stability of the purchasing power of money \[is\] a major consideration in the orderly development of the entire economic system.”[^3]

There are very detailed statements of Christian doctrine when it comes to the morals of _acquiring and using money_; for example, the Christian literature on usury and on the ethics of seeking money for money’s sake is legendary. But important though these problems may be, they are only remotely connected to the moral and cultural aspects of the _production of money_, and especially to the modern conditions under which this production takes place. Here we face a wide gap.

Things are not much better if we turn to the discipline that is supposed to be most concerned about money production, namely, economic science. There are innumerable economic writings on money and banking, but the number of works that are truly helpful in understanding the moral and spiritual issues of money production is rather small. The more recent literature in this field has tended to be especially myopic in regard to our concerns.

Monetary economics deals with discount and open-market policies, and with the typical goals of policy-makers, such as price stability, economic growth, full employment, and so on. But it does not usually offer any wider historical, theoretical, and institutional perspective. For example, few textbooks actually address the workings of a gold standard; yet a basic acquaintance with this institution is necessary to understand the present state of monetary affairs in the Western world, as well as our political options.

The same textbooks also tend to suffer from an overly narrow conception of economic analysis, focusing on the relations between a few macroeconomic aggregates, such as the money supply, the price level, and national production. This focus might have a certain pedagogical justification, but it is nevertheless much too restrictive to do justice to our subject. The production of money has an enormous impact on the relationships between human persons and groups such as families and private associations. The rules of money production determine to a large extent the transformation of monetary systems through time.[^4] All of this is important from a moral and spiritual point of view. Yet it simply vanishes from our intellectual radar screen if we look on money and banking only through macroeconomic spectacles.

Finally, few works actually make the step of integrating economic and moral categories. The great bulk of the literature either offers no moral assessment of monetary institutions at all, or it sets out on moral criticism of existing institutions without a thorough grasp of economics. Unfortunately, the latter shortcoming is particularly widespread, even among concerned and well-intentioned theologians and teachers of business ethics.

Let us emphasize that this gap concerns most notably the moral aspects of _modern_ monetary institutions—in particular banks, central banks, and paper money. The Bible provides rather clear-cut moral guidance in regard to the production of money in ancient times, in particular with regard to gold and silver coin making.[^5] Similarly, the medieval scholastics had developed a very thorough moral doctrine dealing with the old ways of making money. The first scientific treatise on money, Nicholas Oresme’s _Treatise on the Alteration of Money_, made important breakthroughs and is filled with insights that are still relevant in our day.[^6] Prior to his writings, the teaching office of the Catholic Church had addressed these problems, most notably Pope Innocent III’s _Quanto_ (1199), which denounced debasement of coins made out of precious metals.

But then the gap appears as soon as we turn to modern conditions. The old precepts about coin making do not exhaust the problems we confront in the age of paper money. And perhaps we encounter here the main reason why contemporary popes did not follow up on their medieval predecessors with any statement addressing the monetary institutions of our age.

In our book we purport to show how high the price of this gap is. Our exposition will be arranged around the _economics_ of money production.[^7] Adam Smith and many of his followers have called economics a moral science, and rightly so. Economics not only deals with moral beings—human persons—but it also addresses a great number of questions that have direct moral relevance. In the present case, this concerns most notably the question of whether any social benefits can be derived from the political manipulation of the money supply, or the question of how inflation affects the moral and spiritual disposition of the population. The economics of money production will lead us quite naturally to considerations of a juridical, moral, historical, and political nature. Our goal is not to be exhaustive, but to paint a broad picture in sufficient detail.

Accordingly, we will first deal with what we will call the “natural production of money” (Part One) and discuss the ways it can be improved in light of moral considerations. Then we will turn to inflation, the perversion of natural money production (Part Two). Here we will place great emphasis on the difference between two types of inflation. On the one hand, there is private inflation, which springs up spontaneously in any human society, but which is combated by the power of the state. On the other hand, there is fiat inflation, which as its name says actually enjoys the protection of the state and is therefore an institutionalized perversion of money production. In the final part (Part Three) we will then apply these distinctions in a brief analysis of the monetary systems of the West since the seventeenth century.

We will argue that natural money production can work; that it has worked wherever it has been tried; and that there are no tenable technical, economic, legal, moral, or spiritual reasons to suppress its operation. By contrast, there are a great number of considerations that prove conclusively the harmful and evil character of inflation. And in our time inflation has become persistent and aggravated because various legal provisions actually protect the monetary institutions that produce this inflation.

Money production is therefore a problem of justice in a double sense. On the one hand, the modern institutions of money production depend on the prevailing legal order and thus fall within one of the innermost provinces of what has been called social justice.[^8] On the other hand, the prevailing legal order is itself the very problem that causes perennial inflation. Legal monopolies, legal-tender laws, and the legalized suspension of payments have unwittingly become instruments of social injustice. They breed inflation, irresponsibility, and an illicit distribution of income, usually from the poor to the rich. These legal institutions cannot be justified and should be abolished at once. Such abolition is likely to entail the elimination of the predominant monetary institutions of our age: central banks, paper money, and fractional-reserve banking.[^9] Yet far from seeing herein merely an act of destruction, such an event can be greeted as a restoration of monetary sanity and as a necessary condition for a more humane economy.

It is true that these are rather radical conclusions. However, one must not shy away from taking a strong stance in the face of great evil; and great evil is precisely what we confront in the present case. Our goal is not to press a partisan program, however. We seek merely to acquaint the reader with the essential facts needed for a moral evaluation of monetary institutions.[^10]

## 2. Remarks About Relevant Literature

The argument for natural money production and against inflation goes back many centuries, to the fourteenth century French bishop, Nicholas Oresme.[^11] Before him, St. Thomas Aquinas and others had considered various aspects of the problem. But none of them had tackled it from a consistent point of view and none of them had presented their ideas in a treatise. There were the beginnings of a doctrine, but this doctrine was scattered throughout the writings of Aquinas, Buridan, and others.[^12] Oresme’s great achievement was to integrate these previous works, as well as his own penetrating insights, into a treatise—the first treatise on money ever. The great historian of medieval economic thought Victor Brants pointed out that there is certainly merit in assembling such a work. And Brants observed very justly that Oresme was unsurpassed for centuries; he expressed “ideas that were very much on the point, more on the point than those that would dominate long after him.”[^13] In hindsight we can certainly say that Oresme’s “Treatise” has stood the test of time. Translations into English, German, and French are still in print and monetary economists all over the world admire the work for its conciseness, clarity, and depth.

Later on the case for natural money production and against inflation was taken up and refined in various directions through the writings of the “proto-currency school” branch of the School of Salamanca (Saravia de la Calle, Martín Azpilcueta, Tomás de Mercado).[^14] Yet none of these authors seems to have produced a treatise that could match Oresme’s earlier work.

Another two centuries later, however, economists such as Richard Cantillon, David Hume, Étienne de Condillac, John Wheatley, David Ricardo, and William Gouge published noteworthy contributions on problems of money production.[^15] These writers had more or less dropped the scholastic concern for the spiritual dimension of the question, but they pioneered a realistic economic analysis of fractional-reserve banking and paper money. Some of these writings are still in print today and have thus stood the test of time. We do not disparage their merit and their brilliance in noting that they, too, in the new field of banking and paper money, could not quite match the achievement of the old master, Oresme, in the field of commodity money.

In our age, the authors who have contributed most to the analysis of our problem were two agnostic Jews, Ludwig von Mises (1881–1973) and Murray N. Rothbard (1926–1995), who in turn were followers of the founder of the Austrian School of economics, Carl Menger (1840–1920).[^16] Mises integrated the theory of money and banking within the overall theory of subjective value and pioneered a macroeconomic analysis in the realist tradition. In Rothbard’s work, then, the Austrian theory of money found its present apex. Rothbard not only developed and refined the doctrine of his teacher Mises; he also brought ethical concerns back into the picture, stressing natural-law categories to criticize fractional-reserve banking and paper money. Our work is squarely built on the work of these two writers. Important living authors in this tradition are Pascal Salin, George Reisman, and Jesús Huerta de Soto.[^17]

The affinity between Austrian School economics and the scholastic tradition is fairly well known among experts.[^18] The modern Austrian School distinguishes itself by a quest for realism that pervades both its arguments and the problems it deals with. Much more so than any other present-day paradigm in economic science, its cognitive approach and its practical conclusions are in harmony with the scholastic tradition. One historian of economic thought characterized the scholastic approach to the analysis of economic phenomena in the following words:

> they did not examine an economic problem as an autonomous phenomenon, consisting of measurable variables, but only as an adjunct of the social and spiritual order and in the context of the _cura animarum_, the care of souls.[^19]

Austrians share the scholastic belief that there is no such thing as an economic science dealing with autonomous variables. Economic problems are aspects of larger social phenomena; and it is most expedient to deal with them as such, rather than to analyze them in some twisted separation.[^20]

Not surprisingly, Austrian economics has inspired the few viable modern contributions to the moral analysis of money production. Apart from Rothbard’s works, we need to mention in particular Bernard Dempsey’s _Interest and Usury_ (1943). From the pen of a trained Thomist philosopher and economist, this book is a path-breaking contribution to the moral analysis of fractional-reserve banking and thus covers some of the ground of our present study. Dempsey has shown that economic analysis can be successfully blended with the scholastic philosophical tradition into something like the natural theology of money and banking. The reason is that “there is no irreconcilable conflict of basic principle; both parties proceed from truths known from natural reason alone.”[^21]

Two decades later, Friedrich Beutter undertook a systematic moral assessment of inflation in our time and came to conclusions very much akin to those of Nicolas Oresme. He argued that inflation, in principle, is morally evil and that it could only be licit to overcome ”epochal” conflicts and crises.[^22]

In our day, Thomas Woods has brilliantly argued that Austrian economics on the one hand and Christian morals—Catholicism in particular—on the other hand are fully compatible. In _The Church and the Market_ (2005), he gives a concise statement of the Austrian analysis of the labor market, of money and banking, of foreign aid, and of the welfare state; and he shows that this analysis provides crucial information for an adequate moral assessment of the market economy and of government interventionism.

Unfortunately, these works have been rather exceptional. During most of the past 150 years, Christian writers, and Catholic intellectuals in particular, have been quarreling with the economic institutions of the modern world; and this uneasy relationship had ample foundations in fact, as we will see in more detail. But whereas these thinkers refused to make peace with the secular world, they fatefully made their peace with pro-inflation doctrines that became fashionable again during the Great Depression. And this in turn vitiated their moral assessment of modern monetary institutions.

A good case in point is Anthony Hulme’s book _Morals and Money_. Truly excellent in its exposition of what the Bible and the Christian moral tradition have to say about money, it also endorses age-old mercantilist fallacies about the workings of money within the economy. Hulme believes that the money supply has to grow along with output and that the slowing down of aggregate spending is disadvantageous, as is hoarding, deflation, and the diversion of spending streams into financial markets. This leads him straight to the conclusion that “our currency needs to be managed.”[^23] He deplores the inflation produced by fractional-reserve banks, but not because it is inflationary (after all he believes that inflation is necessary), but because it benefits _private_ agents. The solution to present-day monetary calamities is not to abolish the institutions of inflation root and branch, but to hand the inflation machine over to elected politicians.[^24]

In short, misconceptions about the economic role of the money supply have vitiated the efforts of scholars to develop a cogent moral assessment of modern monetary institutions. We will therefore discuss the crucial question whether there are any social benefits to be derived from the manipulation of the natural production of money in a special chapter (chap. 4) of the present work.

Another group of noteworthy studies integrating moral concerns and Austrian economics comes from the pen of evangelical scholars who call themselves “Christian Reconstructionists.” In particular, Gary North’s _Honest Money_ (1986) brilliantly combines biblical exposition and economics. Any serious attempt to come to grips with money and banking from a moral point of view must take account of the arguments presented in North’s work.[^25]

Other authors have argued along similar lines, yet without attaining the level of sophistication displayed in North.[^26] Money and banking are fascinating subjects. They have attracted a panoply of writers who have neither the knowledge nor the intellectual ability to master this field. The quantitative dominance of these poor writings might have contributed to throwing the entire enterprise of integrating ethics and monetary economics into disrepute.

But there is also another strong mechanism at work that helps account for the dearth of scholarship along these lines: professional and institutional bias.

The general thrust of the above-mentioned works is to cast serious doubts on the necessity and expediency of the government-sponsored production of money through central banks and monetary authorities. The authors argue that money and banking should best be subject to the general stipulations of the civil law. The government should not run or supervise banks and the production of paper money. Its essential mission is to protect property rights, especially the property of bank customers; any further involvement produces more harm than good. Now it is one of the home truths of the economics profession that virtually all of its members are government employees. Even more to the point, a great number of _monetary_ economists are employees of central banks and other monetary authorities; and even those monetary economists who are “only” regular professors at state universities derive considerable prestige, and sometimes also large chunks of their income, from research conducted on behalf of monetary authorities.

Economists relish in pointing out the importance of economic incentives in the determination of human behavior. While virtually no section of society has escaped their scathing criticism, until very recently few of them have been concerned about their own incentives. Yet the facts are plain: championing government involvement in money and banking pays the bills; promoting the opposite agenda shuts the doors to an academic career. No consistent economist could expect monetary economists to lead campaigns against central banks and paper money.[^27]

He who acquaints himself with the modern scientific literature on money and banking must not close his eyes to these facts.

[^1]: See, for example, Jack Guynn, “Ethical Challenges in a Market Economy” (speech delivered at Bridgewater College, Bridgewater, Virginia, April 11, 2005). The author is the president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.

[^2]: John Paul II, _Centesimus Annus_ (1991), §§19, 48.

[^3]: John XXIII, _Mater et Magistra_ (1961), §129. There is also no entry on our subject in the recent official compilation of documents pertaining to Catholic social doctrine; see Pontifical Council for Justice and Peace, _Compendium of the Social Doctrine of the Church_ (Vatican: Libreria Editrice Vaticana, 2004).

[^4]: Few works in current literature stress this point. See Angela Redish, _Bimetallism—An Economic and Historical Analysis_ (Cambridge: Cambridge University press, 2000); T.J. Sargent and F.R. Velde, _The Big Problem of Small Change_ (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2002).

[^5]: For an overview, see Rousas J. Rushdoony, “Hard Money and Society in the Bible,” in Hans Sennholz, ed., _Gold Is Money_ (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood, 1975).

[^6]: See Nicholas Oresme, “A Treatise on the Origin, Nature, Law, and Alterations of Money,” in Charles Johnson, ed., _The De Moneta of Nicholas Oresme and English Mint Documents_ (London: Thomas Nelson and Sons, 1956).

[^7]: The notion that economic considerations must be taken account of in moral deliberation is not foreign to Christian thought. For a discussion of the scholastic doctrine of “Common Good” and the related problem of scaling values, see Jacob Viner, “Religious Thought and Economic Society,” _History of Political Economy_ 10, no. 1 (Spring 1978): 50–61. The ethical implications of social science—especially economics—have recently been discussed with much vigor in Leland B. Yeager, _Ethics as Social Science: The Moral Philosophy of Social Cooperation_ (Cheltenham, U.K.: Edward Elgar, 2001). The existence of such implications is also recognized and emphasized in Catholic social doctrine. To put the matter in very simple terms: while the general mission of the Church (evangelization) stresses certain universal principles of faith and morals, the application of these principles to concrete problems (such as money production) must also rely on information provided by the social sciences. See Second Vatican Council, _Gaudium et Spes,_ No. 36 (1965); Hervé Carrier, _Nouveau regard sur la doctrine sociale de l’église_ (Vatican: Pontifical Council “Justice and Peace,” 1990), pp. 42–44, 200–02; Pontifical Council for Justice and Peace, _Compendium of the Social Doctrine of the Church_, §9, pp. 4–5.

[^8]:
    The concept of social justice has been developed by Luigi Taparelli d’Azeglio, _Saggio teoretico di diritto naturale appogiato sul fatto_ (5 vols., Palermo: Antonio Muratori, 1840–43). Pius XI adopted it for his exposition of Catholic social doctrine in _Quadragesimo Anno_. He said in particular:

    > The public institutions themselves, of peoples... ought to make all human society conform to the needs of the common good; that is, to the norm of social justice. If this is done, that most important division of social life, namely, economic activity, cannot fail likewise to return to right and sound order. (§110)

    And the man who wrote the first draft of this encyclical emphasized that social justice was supposed to have an impact on economic institutions via the legal framework: “it shall bring about a legal social order that will result in the proper economic order.” Oswald von Nell-Breuning, _Reorganization of Social Economy: The Social Encyclical Developed and Explained_ (Milwaukee: Bruce, 1936), p. 250. For an excellent discussion of social justice see Matthew Habiger, _Papal Teaching on Private Property, 1891 to 1991_ (Lanham, Md.: University Press of America, 1990), pp. 103–29.

[^9]: Fractional-reserve banks do not keep all the money that their customers deposit with them, but lend a part of the deposit to other people; in most textbooks this is called “bank money creation.” The customer’s bank account is therefore only partially (fractionally) backed by corresponding money under direct control of the bank. Below we will deal with this type of business in more detail.

[^10]:
    A good number of authors who have analyzed the modern problems of money production from a Christian point of view have arrived at very similar conclusions, and did not hold back these views out of any misconceived notion of temperance. Fr. Dennis Fahey started his book quoting from a letter to the Apostolic Delegate in Great Britain. The letter was from the pen of a group of mainly Catholic businessmen and scholars. The authors state that they had “studied the fundamental causes of the present world unrest” and “have long been forced to the conclusion that an essential first step... is the immediate resumption by the community in each nation of its prerogative over the issue of money including its modern credit substitutes.” _Money Manipulation and Social Order_ (Dublin: Browne & Nolan, 1944). And Fr. Anthony Hulme concluded his exquisite study quite along the same lines:

    > The work was written to show that there is a problem, to show that the problem is chiefly one of creation of interest bearing debt which is permitted to be used as basis for money, to show the way in which this is permeated by the rights to a return on money lent. (_Morals and Money_ \[London: St. Paul Publications, 1957\], p. 160)

[^11]: On Oresme see in particular Émile Bridrey, _La théorie de la monnaie au XIVe siècle, Nicolas Oresme_ (Paris: Giard & Brière, 1906), Pierre Souffrin and Alain P. Segonds, eds., _Nicolas Oresme, Tradition et innovation chez un intellectuel du XIVe siècle_ (Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 1988); Lucien Gillard, “Nicole Oresme, économiste,” _Revue historique_ 279 (1988); Jeanne Quillet, ed., _Autour de Nicole Oresme_, _Actes du Colloque Oresme organisé à l’Université de Paris XII_ (Paris: Bibliothèque de l’histoire de la philosophie, 1990); Bertram Schefold, ed., _Vademecum zu einem Klassiker der mittelalterlichen Geldlehre_ (Düsseldorf: Wirtschaft & Finanzen, 1995). Recent surveys of the literature are in J.H.J. Schneider, “Oresme, Nicolas,” _Biographisch-Bibliographisches Kirchenlexikon_ 6 (Nordhausen: Bautz, 1993); and in Hendrik Mäkeler, “Nicolas Oresme und Gabriel Biel: Zur Geldtheorie im späten Mittelalter,” _Scripta Mercaturae_ 37, no. 1 (2003). A recent work stressing the political implications of Oresme’s “Treatise” is C.J. Nederman, “Community and the Rise of Commercial Society: Political Economy and Political Theory in Nicholas Oresme’s _De Moneta_,” _History of Political Thought_ 21, no. 1 (2000).

[^12]: A very thorough study of Aquinas’s monetary thought and its sources of inspiration is in Fabian Wittreck, _Geld als Instrument der Gerechtigkeit. Die Geldrechtslehre des Hl. Thomas von Aquin in ihrem interkulturellen Kontext_ (Paderborn: Schöningh, 2002). More generally on the “School of Paris” (to which Aquinas belonged) see Odd Langholm, _Economics in the Medieval Schools: Wealth, Exchange, Value, Money and Usury According to the Paris Theological Tradition, 1200–1350_ (Leiden: Brill, 1992).

[^13]: In the original: “des idées très justes, plus justes que celles qui dominèrent longtemps après lui.” Victor Brants, _L’économie politique au Moyen-Age: esquisse des théories économiques professées par les écrivains des XIIIe et XIVe siècles_ (reprint, New York: Franklin, \[1895\] 1970), p. 187, footnote 2; and p. 190.

[^14]: See Huerta de Soto, “New Light on the Prehistory of the Theory of Banking and the School of Salamanca,” _Review of Austrian Economics_ 9, no. 2 (1996). Modern translations of these writings are not readily available. However, thanks to the Acton Institute, two works of the School of Salamanca have recently been translated and published in English: Juan de Mariana, “A Treatise on the Alteration of Money,” _Journal of Markets and Morality_ 5, no. 2 (\[1609\] 2002); and Martín de Azpilcueta, “Commentary on the Resolution of Money,” _Journal of Markets and Morality_ 7, no. 1 (\[1556\] 2004). Since we cannot go into detail, let us merely remark that both works lack the lucidity and penetration that can be found in Oresme’s treatise. Moreover, Azpilcueta’s work does not really deal with money, but with exchange in general and in particular with the concept of just price. It considers monetary problems (such as the distinction between the monetary and nonmonetary use of coins) only to the extent that they affect this concept. To the present author it is a mystery why the original title “comentario resolutorio de cambios” has been rendered as “commentary on the resolution of money.” A literal translation would be “commentary settling problems of the theory of exchange.”

[^15]: See Richard Cantillon, _La nature du commerce en général_ (Paris: Institut national d’études démographiques, 1997); David Hume, _Essays_ (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1987); Étienne Condillac, _Le commerce et le gouvernement,_ 2nd ed. (Paris: Letellier, 1795); John Wheatley, _The Theory of Money and Principles of Commerce_ (London: Bulmer, 1807); David Ricardo, _Works and Correspondence_ (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1951–73), vol. 4; William Gouge, _A Short History of Paper Money and Banking in the United States_ (New York: Kelley, 1968).

[^16]: See Carl Menger, _Grundsätze der Volkswirtschaftslehre_ (Vienna: Braumüller, 1871); idem, _Untersuchungen über die Methode der Socialwis-senschaften und der politischen Oekonomie insbesondere_ (Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot, 1883), pp. 161–78; idem, “Geld” (1892); Ludwig von Mises, _Theorie des Geldes und der Umlaufsmittel_ (Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot, 1912); _Human Action_ (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, \[1949\] 1998); Nurray N. Rothbard, _Man, Economy, and State,_ 3rd ed. (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1993); idem, _What Has Government Done to Our Money?,_ 4th ed. (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1990); idem, _The Mystery of Banking_ (New York: Richardson & Snyder, 1983); idem, _The Case Against the Fed_ (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1994). See also F.A. Hayek, _Free Choice in Currency_ (London: Institute of Economic Affairs, 1976); Henry Hazlitt, _The Inflation Crisis and How to Resolve It_ (Irvington-on-Hudson, N.Y.: Foundation for Economic Education, \[1978\] 1995); Hans Sennholz, _Age of Inflation_ (Belmont, Mass.: Western Islands, 1979); idem, _Money and Freedom_ (Spring Mills, Penn.: Libertarian Press, 1985). Among the earlier noteworthy contributions to the Austrian theory of money and banking see in particular Fritz Machlup, _Die Goldkernwährung_ (Halberstadt: Meyer, 1925); F.A. Hayek, _Monetary Nationalism and International Stability_ (New York: Kelley, \[1937\] 1964).

[^17]: See in particular Pascal Salin, _La vérité sur la monnaie_ (Paris: Odile Jacob, 1990); George Reisman, _Capitalism_ (Ottawa, Ill.: Jameson Books, 1996); Jesús Huerta de Soto, _Money, Bank Credit, and Economic Cycles_ (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 2006). See also Mark Skousen, _Economics of a Pure Gold Standard,_ 3rd ed. (Irvington-on-Hudson, N.Y.: Foundation for Economic Education, 1996); Walter Block, “Fractional Reserve Banking: An Interdisciplinary Perspective,” Walter Block and Llewellyn H. Rockwell, Jr., eds., _Man, Economy, and Liberty_ (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988); Hans-Hermann Hoppe, _The Economics and Ethics of Private Property_ (Boston: Kluwer, 1993), chap. 3; idem, “How Is Fiat Money Possible?—or, The Devolution of Money and Credit,” _Review of Austrian Economics_ 7, no. 2 (1994); Hans-Hermann Hoppe, Jörg Guido Hülsmann, and Walter Block, “Against Fiduciary Media,” _Quarterly Journal of Austrian Economics_ 1, no. 1 (1998): 19–50; Jörg Guido Hülsmann, _Logik der Währungskonkurrenz_ (Essen: Management Akademie Verlag, 1996); special issue on “L’Or, fondement monétaire du commerce international” in _Le point de rencontre—libéral et croyant,_ vol. 49 (October 1996); special issue on “Deflation and Monetary Policy” in _Quarterly Journal of Austrian Economics_ 6, no. 4 (2003).

[^18]: It is indeed more than a mere affinity. Rothbard and Huerta de Soto have explored the historical roots of Austrian economics in the economic writings of the late-scholastic School of Salamanca. See Murray Rothbard, “New Light on the Prehistory of the Austrian School,” Edwin Dolan, ed., _The Foundations of Modern Austrian Economics_ (Kansas City: Sheed & Ward, 1976), pp. 52–74; idem, _Economic Thought Before Adam Smith_ (Cheltenham, U.K.: Edward Elgar, 1995), chap. 4; Alejandro Chafuen, _Faith and Liberty: The Economic Thought of the Late Scholastics,_ 2nd ed. (New York: Lexington Books, 2003); Jesús Huerta de Soto, “New Light on the Prehistory of the Theory of Banking and the School of Salamanca”; idem, “Juan de Mariana: The Influence of the Spanish Scholastics,” Randall Holcombe, ed., _15 Great Austrian Economists_ (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1999). See also Jean-Michel Poughon, “Les fondements juridiques de l’économie politique,” _Journal des Économistes et des Études Humaines_ 1, no. 4 (1990). On the School of Salamanca, see in particular Marjorie Grice-Hutchinson, _The School of Salamanca_ (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1952); Wilhelm Weber, _Geld und Zins in der spanischen Spätscholastik_ (Münster: Aschendorff, 1962); Ramon Tortajada, “La renaissance de la scolastique, la Réforme et les théories du droit naturel,” A. Béraud and G. Faccarello, eds., _Nouvelle histoire de la pensée économique_ (Paris: La Découverte, 1992), vol. 1, chap. 2.

[^19]:
    Julius Kirshner, “Raymond de Roover on Scholastic Economic Thought,” introduction to R. de Roover, _Business, Banking, and Economic Thought in Late Medieval and Early Modern Europe_ (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1974), p. 21. Kirshner’s teacher, de Roover, stated:

    > The great difference between scholastics and contemporary economics is one of scope and methodology: the Doctors approached economics from a legal point of view. They attached excessive importance to formalism, so that the study of economics nearly reduced itself to an investigation into the form and nature of contracts. (Ibid., p. 21)

    At the end of the present work, the reader will be in a better position to judge the extent to which this approach is “excessive” or justifiable in the light of useful results.

[^20]: In a brilliant essay, the Lutheran theologian Wilhelm Kasch has argued that the present-day separation of monetary theory and theology has harmed both disciplines. It has driven theology toward a gnostic denial of the world; and it has turned monetary theory into a narrow auxiliary discipline of central-bank policy. Kasch points out that monetary theory, precisely because it is so narrowly conceived, is in the process of misunderstanding its subject matter and losing any scientific foundation, turning itself into a barren intellectual game. See Wilhelm Kasch, “Geld und Glaube. Problemaufriß einer defizitären Beziehung,” idem, ed., _Geld und Glaube_ (Paderborn: Schöningh, 1979). This problem persists to the present day. The discussion of the theological and moral aspects of money production typically revolves around the—vague—central-bank objective of monetary stability. See for example H. Hesse and O. Issing (eds.), _Geld und Moral_ (Munich: Vahlen, 1994).

[^21]: Dempsey, _Interest and Usury_ (Washington, D.C.: American Council of Public Affairs, 1943), p. 116; see also pp. 1–6. Based on this work, Fr. Dempsey received his Ph.D. in economics at Harvard under Schumpeter. On Dempsey’s economics see Stephen D. Long, “Bernard Dempsey’s Theological Economics: Usury, Profit, and Human Fulfillment,” _Theological Studies_ 12, no. 1 (1996); idem, _Divine Economy: Theology and the Market_ (London: Routledge, 2000), pp. 195–214; John T. Noonan, _The Scholastic Analysis of Usury_ (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1957), pp. 403–06.

[^22]: See Friedrich Beutter, _Zur sittlichen Beurteilung von Inflationen_ (Freiburg: Herder, 1965), pp. 173, 178–79.

[^23]: Hulme, _Morals and Money_, p. 71.

[^24]: The same characteristic set of ideas (acceptance of the basic case for inflation; therefore only rejection of “private” fractional-reserve banking, while endorsement of “public” fiat paper money) can be identified in all major Catholic authors until the early post-war period. See for example, Fathers Francis Drinkwater, _Money and Social Justice_ (London: Burns, Oates & Washbourne, 1934); Charles Coughlin, _Money! Questions and Answers_ (Royal Oak, Mich.: National Union for Social Justice, 1936); and Dennis Fahey, _Money Manipulation and Social Order_ (1944); Oswald von Nell-Breuning and J. Heinz Müller, _Vom Geld und vom Kapital_ (Freiburg: Herder, 1962). A critique of Coughlin and Fahey is in Thomas Woods, _The Church and the Market_ (Lanham, Md.: Lexington Books, 2005), pp. 106–09. Hilaire Belloc and John Ryan maintained similar economic views as Coughlin and Fahey. For a present-day work of this orientation see Joseph Huber and James Robertson, _Creating New Money_ (London: New Economics Foundation, 2000).

[^25]: This should not be taken as an all-out endorsement of North’s more general enterprise of developing a “Christian economics.” The present author does not believe that there is such a discipline, just as there is no Bolshevist mathematics or Muslim quantum physics.

[^26]: Among the better works of this group we might mention Howard Kershner’s _God, Gold, and Government_ (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1957), R.J. Rushdoony’s _Institutes of Biblical Law_ (Nutley, N.J.: Craig Press, 1973) and _The Roots of Inflation_ (Vallecito, Calif.: Ross House Books, 1982), Ian Hodge’s _Baptized Inflation_ (Tyler, Texas: Dominion Press, 1986), and Tom Rose’s _God, Gold, and Civil Government_ (2002). See also Roland Baader, _Geld, Gold und Gottspieler_ (Gräfelfing: Resch, 2004).

[^27]: See Lawrence H. White, “The Federal Reserve System’s Influence on Research in Monetary Economics,” _Econ Journal Watch_ 2, no. 2 (2005): pp. 325–54. Significantly, the only recent successful campaign for monetary reform that was led by professional economists had to avoid the involvement of “experts” employed with monetary authorities. When Fritz Machlup, Milton Friedman, and others prepared the reform of the Bretton Woods system in the late 1960s, they studiously excluded any intellectuals employed by or affiliated with the IMF. Institutional backing came from outside the monetary establishment, namely, from the American Enterprise Institute. The movement eventually rallied in the town of Bürgenstock in Switzerland. See the eyewitness account of one of the members of the Bürgenstock Group in Wolfgang Kaspers, “The Liberal Idea and Populist Statism in Economic Policy: A Personal Perspective,” Hardy Bouillon, ed., _Do Ideas Matter? Essays in Honour of Gerard Radnitzky_ (Brussels: Centre for the New Europe, 2001), p. 118.
